In honor of the veterans who have served our country, both past and present, First National Bank proudly sponsors Veterans of the Valley.
Since 1862, First National has provided local decision-making and accessibility, as well as banking products and services to Brazos Valley citizens.
First National Bank.
First, always.
Welcome back and thanks for joining us on another edition of Veterans of the Valley.
Little did he know that when he went out horseback riding on that sunny Sunday morning in the Trinity River bottom with an Aggie buddy in 1941 that when he returned the U.S.
would be at war with Japan.
Our guest today says he made a big circle.
That's how he describes the events from his junior year at Texas A&M in 1941 until his return to the area that he describes as the best place I've ever lived.
and began his teaching career in 1975 at Texas A&M, with stops in Australia and New Guinea along the way.
Sit back with me and visit with this veteran of the Valley, Frank Litterst, Jr., 85 years young and sharp as a tack.
Frank, you thank you very much for being here today.
We appreciate it.
It's my privilege.
Thank you very much.
And I just want to say first that if you thought you were getting an Audie Murphy, now you're mistaken because I was no hero.
All of the veterans in our eyes are heroes in some way, shape, or form.
If you served, you're definitely a hero in the eyes of everyone around here.
Thank you, sir.
Take us back to that Sunday that you went out horseback riding and you came back and basically your world was turned upside down.
Well, I was in the Corps.
I was the first sergeant at that time in my battery and thought I was important and
So when I came out of there and found we were at war while we rushed back over and thought we'd be leaving the next week or so, but of course we weren't and we stayed through the next year and our senior year was changed from the fall of 42 to spring of 43 as normal and we had to go through the summer of 42 and the fall of 42
and we got out Christmas time so that we'd get into the service early and that's the way we ended.
We got real serious about the military end of it and just about forgot everything else but what was coming off in the war and it was a big deal to us and it was a big deal to everybody.
Right.
Now, your class of 43 basically had quite a distinction from all the other classes of any, and basically you were all taken into the military all at once in mass, so to speak.
Yes, sir.
A lot of us hung around here after the senior semester in the fall of 42, and we all accumulated around here in January of 43, and
I think it was January 23rd.
I got on the train or bus or something, and we went to our respective, whatever we were, artillery, infantry, and so forth.
I went to Camp Davis, North Carolina for anti-aircraft artillery OCS for 13 weeks.
And then we got commissioned at the end of that period, which was May 6 for me.
Okay.
And just a couple of days later, after May 6?
May 6, 43, I got commissioned.
May the 8th, I got married.
And we had a wonderful marriage, 59 years.
and lost her, passed away in 2002, recently, and we got married, had a short honeymoon, and part of it was going to Galveston and blackout, and then the other part of it, we had some days left, came back up here and stayed in the old hotel down in Bryan, and came back here and saw some of the guys that hadn't left,
Then we headed for Camp Stewart, Georgia and stayed there through the summer until August 7th and went overseas.
Now, I understand you were in the Army, but you actually had a fervent love for planes.
You really wanted to be in the Air Corps.
I wanted to be a flyboy, a pilot.
It looked so glamorous.
And when I got to Georgia and had the bad luck of being in our
in a riot there at the base that was pretty bad.
And after I got thinking about it a while, I said, I think I'll see if I can't get up in the air.
And I went over, took an air cold physical and passed it.
and then got back to my battalion headquarters and they said, it's too late, you can't, we're frozen, we got to go overseas.
So after about two and a half months there, three, we left and started headed overseas.
Tell us about that trip.
Basically, I believe you left out of Sacramento, California or somewhere around?
Well, yeah, we took a train from Georgia to Camp Stoneman, California, which was on the Sacramento River, I think.
And you would...
prepare yourself there to go overseas.
They issued you your ordnance, rifles, everything, and got you in the right frame of mind, supposedly.
Aggie friend of mine and I made a mistake of leaving that base and visited a friend of mine, an Aggie Class 42, Maury Curtis, over in the Marine pre-flight.
And when we got back, why, we were almost missed the boat because they were all lined up in their
battle dressed and ready to leave, go down and what you do is march down to a riverboat, get on it on the river, then go down it to Oakland.
And luckily somebody packed our stuff for us and I jumped into my old clothes real quick and we went down the river and by that time it was dark and we climbed aboard a Dutch freighter that was supposed to carry us overseas.
And that evening, and it was, of course, exciting to us.
We had no idea where we were going to go.
And the next morning, we sailed out onto the Golden Gate Bridge and headed west.
It was a long trip, wasn't it?
It was real long.
I went over a little bit earlier than a lot of my classmates.
And submarines were bad.
We had a blimp that went out over us.
could spot them, you know, so far out and then he turned around and left us and we picked up a destroyer escort and we went way down below Christmas Island and then over towards all the New Zealand, Australia area and it took about 27, 28 days.
We zigzagged the whole way to keep getting hit by torpedoes and I remember
It was especially bad because there was no fresh water to bathe in, but to bathe in salt water, and that got pretty raw after a while, you know.
Did you run into any storms along the way?
Not that time, no.
My next trip I did on a boat when I went to New Guinea, but not the Australian trip, yeah.
Australian trip, we landed in Brisbane, Australia, which was a very nice place.
Tell us a little bit about your stay in Australia.
You weren't there that long, really, were you?
We stayed in Brisbane about two, three weeks, bivouacked in a racetrack, Ascot Towns, and everybody over in Australia had a racehorse at that time.
It seemed like we have a dog or a pet.
They were fanatics about it.
Anyway, we took over their racetrack, and they put us on a little train, a little narrow-gauge thing, and no sides, cinders blowing in and everything.
We rode 800 miles north to Townsville, Australia.
We bivouacked out in the boondocks outside of Townsville and stayed there about maybe three months.
And didn't have a bad time there.
And we walked miles and miles and miles in training and so forth, just getting toughed up for going up to New Guinea.
And that's where I had that accident that
I'll mention to you, we had a good baseball team.
You want me to tell you about that?
Oh, absolutely.
We had a good, awesome baseball team, and we beat everybody.
And I had a boxing team that was good, too.
And I got hit by an inside curveball in my left elbow here, and it looked just like a horse's hawk.
It just got real big, a hematoma.
So they took me to the hospital in Townsville, which was a bunch of houses they'd
confiscated from people, and each house was a ward.
Well, we had an officer's ward, and I was laying out in the front porch, you know, and this big guy comes down the street with a very big hat on, you know, western hat, looking girls with him.
If he got closer, we could see it was old John Wayne, and he wasn't going to come see us because we were officers.
It just won't hang with the listed men, so we started moaning and groaning and carrying on up our head.
And he started laughing and he came up there and visited with us, put his old hat on my head and everything, you know.
He was a wonderful man.
I wish we had more like him.
Did he ask you anything about your war wound, so to speak?
Oh, I covered it.
I told him I was machine gun or something, you know, hit by a baseball.
What, after you were in, I also understand the Australians also had some pretty good, like, 14% gear.
Australia is a nice country.
I took another Air Corps physical there, and they said I couldn't go home and grade and take flight training.
Maybe they were getting enough pilots.
I don't know.
It was kind of expensive to take me from there all the way back to flight training.
So I was turned down again, and it probably was a good, maybe saved my life.
But eventually we...
they got my battalion.
We were an unattached battalion of anti-aircraft artillery weapons, and they had us load a Liberty ship up with 500-pound bombs to go up to New Guinea to Port Moresby.
After we loaded it, well, they said, well, you get your stuff together and get on the ship.
You're going to ride on top of these bombs up there, which we did, about 800 of us.
And then about midway to Guinea while we hit a
a tarnate uh typhoon what we call a hurricane yeah typhoon and it was it was awful storm and they i was sleeping on the deck on the cot that old cot would hit one railing and come back and hit the side of the ship you know and it was a rough night and my blanket blew overseas over over the board rather and i
Got all soaking wet, and I came in and got in bed with Aggie named Earl Winchy.
That's the Winchy family from Spring, Texas.
Yeah, he was from Spring.
He didn't like it much.
Earl passed away a couple years ago, but he was a dancer.
He put up with me until the next day.
Eventually, we got to Milne Bay, New Guinea.
It was my first stop up there.
Stayed there a good while.
Set our automatic weapons, our 40 millimeters around the harbor there.
And we didn't have much to do because the 5th Air Force had gotten the Japanese pretty subdued as far as the air raids and so forth.
So we pretty much had air superiority at that time.
We had it, yeah.
That was a great Air Force, the 5th Air Force.
And they invented everything, skip bombing.
took planes and made additions to them, and it was a great outfit, and they got the job done, and we didn't have much to do, except, I don't know, they used to, he thought I was Artie Murphy, I guess, he used to send me and about a dozen men up in the mountains there, the only standing mountain range, which was behind our gun emplacements, it'd take two days to go up, and
We'd stay up there in jungle hammocks, supposedly looking for stray Japanese that had been left there after the Battle of Buna Mission, which was up above us.
Did you ever encounter anything?
They were hungry, and I just...
Thank the Lord to this day, we didn't run into any of them.
I'd have beat them all down that mountainside.
So you basically came back all the time.
I'd have been a real hero.
About my third mission up there, I fell and got hurt.
I fell down the mountain.
But I got back down and eventually decided I wanted to get closer to the ground action.
I transferred to a 155-millimeter artillery outfit combination of seacoast and field artillery up above Finch Avenue, New Guinea on the coast.
Those are the big guns, the 155-millimeter, I think long toms or something.
Long toms, yes sir.
The projectile weighed about 90 pounds.
We were across from New Britain and we hung out up there.
just more New Guinea.
There wasn't much change anywhere.
It was a place that was uninhabited and a lot of the people up in the mountains were up in there were still eating each other.
No cities, no towns, no nothing.
It was a strange vacation.
The Australians
came up there.
The Australian 7th Division was one of them that had come home from Africa, and they sent them up there, and they were just wonderful.
They could fight like all get out, and they handled the groundwork real well.
We were pretty safe.
You get long toms, you can get way back away from somebody.
You can reach way out there, can't you?
Yeah, all it does is it hurts your ears.
I can imagine.
Yeah, we...
I'm glad they didn't depend on us too much because I remember one day we were firing at a toad target for practice out in the water and that ship followed.
And we got close to that ship, he cut target loose.
That was Earl Winchy back there telling me what to set in the guns.
And anyway, it was pretty routine up there after that.
I think I...
They decided I need to come home and get my knee operated on my left knee for my fall.
And then I got dengue fever.
Well, but before you go to that, we've got some pictures that you supplied us.
Let's let them load the pictures up and we'll look up here at the monitor and you can kind of just give us a quick little synopsis of each picture.
There's the first one.
Those pictures were all in Melbourne, New Guinea.
We were right on the water and our gun politicians were too.
The fellow on the left's name was Moon, and the second was Oscar Steinberg and myself, and I can't remember that man on the right.
Old Oscar was from Los Angeles, a real nice fellow, and he couldn't swim.
One day, he stepped off into a hole out there in Middle Bay.
He was trying to enjoy the water, and he went out of sight, and I had to go pull him out of the ocean.
And then I pulled another guy out, too, was trying to swim home.
He had gone out of his head.
Tell us a little bit about this picture.
This picture is, that's at that campstone we're getting ready to go get in the riverboat.
That's me on the right, I think.
On the far right with that helmet cocked that certain way there?
Sir.
With the helmet?
The helmet cocked.
I thought I was something else.
So we were, I just barely made the ship and
The guy in the middle had packed my stuff.
Names I can't remember because that was a long time ago.
And that's me in New Guinea.
Kind of a pensive mood, wishing I was back home to see my bride.
I had a skin place on my nose.
I used to try to box a lot.
I had my head pretty skinned up there in that picture.
But you had a good boxing team too, I'm sure.
Yeah, great.
And that's Captain Moon and myself outside our tent.
So here we're still in Milne Bay.
Yeah, it rained every day there, 140-something inches a year.
And everything Bill did was nasty.
But really compared to lots of kids, I didn't have it bad at all.
I traded cigarettes for that grass skirt.
She went off in a cloud of smoke and no skirt on me.
But they were happy.
I brought that thing home.
I don't know where it is now, but I'm going to find it and wear it Halloween.
Yeah, I went from 160 to 130, and our food wasn't too good.
The guy on the right's named McAtee.
real close friend of mine, and he is a dentist up in Wichita, Kansas now.
He's one of the few living still, and this was at Officer's Candidate School the last day when we got commissioned, and we were actually simply inspecting that fellow.
So this picture is probably at Camp Stewart, Georgia.
That fellow was a Yankee.
No, that was at Camp Davis.
That was at Camp Davis?
Officer's Candidate School there.
And the one on the left is named Jim Beard.
He was raised here in Bryan.
He's dead, deceased, and the one behind him is Cecil Carlisle on the back from Allis, Texas.
He's deceased this past year, and that's Cecil inspecting me there.
We were pretty GI, as you can see.
That's a pretty serious picture, yeah.
I never took anything very seriously.
Those were the days, yeah.
Now, that's a great-looking shot.
That's when I was cleaned up.
That's a clean-cut-looking.
I cleaned up pretty good, didn't I?
You cleaned up good, as they say, absolutely.
Yeah, I just got those bars and wanted to show off a little bit, so they took my picture somewhere.
Now, explain this picture.
I really like this picture.
We look like an awful bunch of rogues.
First, you may want to tell where this is at.
I will.
That's on the outside of Hart Hall on the campus here, right near Military Walk.
And the guy in the white uniform is Ensign George Gay, the only survivor of Torpedo Squadron 8 in the Battle of Midway.
He got shot in the arm.
His plane was shot down.
His gunner behind him got killed.
He floated in the water and saw the whole battle nearly there.
And he came back to A&M and made a big talk down in Kyle Field.
He and Colonel Hilger, who was second commander of the raid on Tokyo, do little raid.
All those guys in the picture were my seniors.
I was the better commander, and I had an old western hat on there, third from the left, and all those fellows there are dead, but me.
Gay's dead, too.
President of American Airlines.
I know Eastern, Eastern Airlines.
Right, okay.
And they're all gone there.
In other words, they're all wiped out and they're getting lonesome.
Those are some great pictures.
So let's get back to the part where you basically, you would hurt your knee
up in the mountains in the beginning.
Yeah, they tore it up pretty good and they came up with it.
But you more or less went about your business for what, almost two years with the Bumpy?
Yeah, about a year and a half I stood around and tried to get along on it, but got fevered and big.
So they put me on a hospital ship, which I don't remember getting on, but it's a sea snipe.
About the middle of the trip home, I kind of remember a little bit.
For some reason it was packed.
Took 17 days.
We landed at the docks there at Los Angeles at nighttime.
And some of those kids had been overseas four years, you know, and they were just punch drunk.
They wanted to get home so bad.
And we looked at those lights of the city, and all of a sudden the lights on the pier came on, and there was a huge orchestra like Benny Goodman or some of those old bands.
And Dinah Shore was there and she started singing to us, you know, and I cried like a baby.
I remember she started singing, I'll walk alone.
I was ready to get off and they made a stable the next day and took us into town on buses near Hollywood to Birmingham General Hospital.
and gave us fried chicken, lettuce and tomatoes, and milk.
That's what we hadn't had in the years.
So that was probably the first real good home-cooked meal you had.
That was the first meal, very first meal.
And then we got on a train, went further up to Modesto to Hammond General Hospital, and I stayed there a while until I was discharged.
Now, I understand, was it there that you ran into O.D.
Butler?
O.D.
Butler and Jake Webster.
You have a nice little story of what a small world this is.
Well, this is a fantastic coincidence.
I rode a lot of Aggies when I was overseas, and one of them was Jake Webster, Sweetwater.
Jake's still alive, and he was in Armored Division and Patton's Army in Europe, and we wrote, and he said, you know, I've gotten shot, and I'm going to come home.
I wrote him back.
I said, I've got hurt in my knee, and I'm going to go home and get it operated on.
I said, wouldn't it be great if we got put in the same hospital?
Yeah, what was the likelihood of that happening?
Well, I walked in.
That play limped into it, and old O.D.
Butler was sitting there, and I said, O.D., you have any idea where my bunk would be?
He said, yeah, you're right over there next to Jake Webster.
I could have almost passed out.
We'd come a long way and got there together.
That's got to be karma, somewhere along the way to get everybody back together.
The length of the life or time of Patton's lieutenant platoon commanders was about two weeks.
They either got wounded or killed.
He got his quick.
And so that's the beginning.
So after you basically went through your hospital, you got your knee taken care of, and you basically ended up back, like we said at the beginning of the show, you more or less made a full circle.
You got back here to College Station.
Well, I finished school here, and I took some graduate work in poultry, animal science, and I was teaching teaching.
poultry labs as a graduate assistant and these old GIs who I was teaching, you know, and they were always asleep or drunk or, you know, they were kind of unruly in class.
It was hot, no air conditioning in those days.
And I told my wife, I said, I don't think I'm cut out for this.
I said, let's go to a ranch in some place.
And so we moved from there to a little town of Barker, Texas, between Houston and Katy.
Stayed there, didn't have any money, tried to get started ranching.
And then I moved to Alice, Texas to work for a feed company.
And I covered all of South Texas, every backyard in Texas.
And one day, Mr. Herman Heap called me from Buda, Texas.
He was a great aggie and benefactor.
And he said, you want to come up here, I'll rent you a house and lease you two pastures.
I was up there in a week.
And my wife had one little child in.
But we got up there and started out ranching with lots of money.
I had a war bond and $400 I borrowed from somebody.
And started the ranching business and we did pretty good at it.
And the old man Heap was very generous and kind.
If you were an Aggie and loved A&M like I did, he loved you.
And he was most helpful to me.
We got larger in the business and eventually I released a range in Center Texas.
It was pretty good size and then ran two in Louisiana for some Houston people.
Frank, we're running out of time.
Well, I was too far away so I moved to College Station to get in the middle and the greatest thing that ever happened to me and my kids and my wife.
Real quick before we run out of time, tell us about your kids.
About the students?
Well, no, more about your family.
You don't want to know about the students in the class.
We're running out.
We're going to have to get you back and cover the students on the second show.
Oh, that A, B, the... Well, my family is... I have two boys and a daughter.
My daughter lives here, and both boys live in Georgetown, Texas.
And they all... My son-in-law's in Aggie.
He played football here when they whipped Bryant in the Cotton Bowl.
And I'm proud of all of them.
He was in the Air Force.
And
Got two sons in the Air Force.
One flew over here yesterday and a B-52 bomber.
Wow.
And another one just starting training.
So we do our best to serve our country and
And A&M, they all love A&M.
There's nothing like it.
It was a home to me.
It still is.
Well, we're out of time, but I would like to thank you very much for being here.
And we're definitely going to have to have you back just so we can hear the story of your unique grading system that really didn't catch quite on.
But thank you for being here.
Well, thank you so much.
It's my pleasure.
You know, Frank Litters Jr.
was raised on a small farm between Katy and Houston, Texas.
He was a Ross volunteer, the captain of the battery at Texas A&M in 1943.
He served his country proudly and without reservation.
Says he'd do it again, and by gosh, I think he would, even when he's 85 years old.
We at Veterans of the Valley salute Frank Litters Jr.
Until next time, goodbye.
you